---
layout: post
title: "What did Larry Summers say about the current economic conditions in the U.S.?"
category: "Money and Finance"
---

Summers' recent research papers may be quite informative if we look forward to some technical judgments towards the U.S. macro-economic conditions as well as the Fed's goals during an abnormal time.

<!-- excerpt-end -->

<br />
## Table of Contents
{:.no_toc}
* TOC 
{:toc}
<br />

## Declines in Worker (Bargaining) Power over Recent Decades

In a [2018 working paper with Stansbury](https://www.piie.com/system/files/documents/wp18-5.pdf)[^1], Summers investigated the stark divergence between labor productivity, measured as net total economy output per hour, and the typical or average worker's compensation inclusive of non-wage benefits, measured as median compensation or mean total economy compensation. The compensation measures are constructed using wage series from the Current Population Survey (CPS) Outgoing Rotation Groups (ORG) as well as Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Current Employment Statistics (CES), adjusted by the average real compensation/wage ratio to include non-wage compensation. Major findings are:

- Over the period of 1975-2015, a 1 percentage point increase in productivity growth was associated with a 0.73 percentage point increase in the growth rate of median compensation,
- Over the period of 1950-2015 and 1975-2015, a 1 percentage point increase in productivity growth was associated with a 0.74 and 0.77 percentage point increase in the growth rate of average compensation respectively,
- Over the period since 2000, the labor share has declined.

$$\text{Total labor rents} = \text{union rents} + \text{industry rents} + \text{firm size rents}$$

- "Labor rents": measured as a share of net value added in the nonfinancial corporate business sector,
- "Union rents": rents arising from union wage premia for unionized workers,
- "Industry rents": industry wage premia,
- "Firm size rents": rents arising from large-firm wage premia.

In the [2020 Brookings working paper](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/StansburySummers-Final-web.pdf)[^2], Stansbury and Summers argued that changes in institutions, economic conditions, and corporate management combined contribute to the decline in worker power or rent-sharing with labor in the US economy over recent decades. Labor rents declined from around 12 percent in the early 1980s to around 6 percent in the 2010s. According to data from the CPS Annual Social and Economic Supplement, observably equivalent private sector workers at large firms (firms with 500 or more employees) enjoy attenuating wage premia relative to those at small firms during 1990-2019. However, the share of workers in large firms has actually grown over the period from 32 percent to 42 percent. More importantly, since the 1980s, the declining labor share of income has been matched with a rise in the capital share of income.

## Tightened Labor Markets

> [Blanchflower and Levin (2015)](https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w21094/w21094.pdf)[^3] - It is readily apparent that the conventional unemployment rate has *not* served as an accurate synopsis of the evolution of labor market slack. For example, the declining unemployment rate over the course of 2010 and most of 2011 was not induced by a pickup in job growth but instead reflected the extent to which many Americans gave up searching for work and departed from the labor force.

- Labor market slack measures on the supply-side: **(1) unemployment rate** (labeled "U3" by BLS) and **(2) prime-age (25-54) nonemployment rate** (the share of the civilian noninstitutional population aged 25-54 that is not working measured by one minus the prime-age employment-to-population ratio),
- Labor market slack measures on the demand-side: **(3) job vacancy rate** (the level of job vacancies divided by the size of the civilian labor force) and **(4) quits rate** (the level of quits divided by the size of the civilian labor force).

According to OECD data, there are 11,254,000 unfilled job vacancies in May 2022 for the United States, indicating a job vacancy rate of 6.8 percent (see [FRED database](https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/LMJVTTUVUSM647S)), similar to the near-record high level in December 2021 reported by the BLS. For June 2022, the BLS Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey reported a job openings level of 10,698,000, down 605,000 from a month earlier, the lowest in nine months and below market expectations of 11 million. Since the unemployed population is 5,670,000, the number of job openings per unemployed is 1.88, a little drop from the all-time high of 1.99 in March. Meanwhile, some 4.2 million Americans quit their jobs, little changed from the prior month, with the quits rate unchanged at 2.8 percent. In July, there are 3,041,000 unemployed persons aged 25-54 and the prime-age nonemployment rate is 20 percent.

> [BLS Employment Situation Summary](https://www.bls.gov/news.release/empsit.nr0.htm) - In July, the unemplyment rate edged down to 3.5 percent, and the number of unemployed persons edged down to 5.7 million. These measures have returned to their levels in February 2020, prior to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic...The labor force particpation rate, at 62.1 percent, and the employment-population ratio, at 60.0 percent, were little changed over the month. Both measures remain below their February 2020 values (63.4 percent and 61.2 percent, respectively).

[Domash and Summers (2022a)](https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w29739/w29739.pdf)[^4] compared the predictive power of the aforementioned four different slack indicators on wage inflation. The baseline regression takes the following form:

$$\log wage_{t} - \log wage_{t-1} = \alpha + \beta slack_{t} + \gamma lagged\_inflation_{t} + \epsilon_{t},$$

where the lagged inflation variable is a 3-year weighted average of CPI that assigns a weight of three to inflation in period $t-1$, a weight of two to inflation in period $t-2$, and a weight of one to inflation in period $t-3$, to control for expected inflation. The results show that **the unemployment rate is much more significant than the labor force participation rate in explaining wage inflation** using the CPS-ORG composition-adjusted mean and median wages (given that the prime-age employment-to-population ratio is mathematically equivalent to the labor force participation rate multiplied by one minus unemployment rate); the vacancy rate and the quits rate are broadly comparable to the unemployment rate in their ability to predict wage inflation. To assess the tightness of the current labor markets, another linear-log model is estimated with data from January 2001 to December 2019, avoiding any changes induced by the Covid-19 pandemic:

$$\text{Predicted unemployment rate}_{t} = \alpha + \beta \sum\limits_{0}^{12} \log \text{vacancy rate}_{t - i} + \delta \sum\limits_{0}^{12} \log \text{quits rate}_{t - i} + \gamma \text{time trend}_{t} + \theta \text{structural break}_{t} + \epsilon_{t},$$

where the selection for the structural break is July 2009, learning from [Michaillat and Saez (2019)](https://eml.berkeley.edu/~saez/michaillat-saezRESTUD19.pdf)[^5], who found a break in the relationship between the job vacancy rate and the unemployment rate at the time. The underlying reasoning is to examine what unemployment rate is consistent with the current levels of job vacancies and quits. 

> For December 2021, this model specification predicts a firm-side equivalent unemployment rate (at the national level) between 1.2 and 1.7 percent, compared to the actual unemployment rate of 3.9 percent, signaling a very tight labor market from the perspective of employers. Using a linear model instead of a linear-log model would lower the estimated firm-side unemployment even further.

## Run-up in Inflation

Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's [Wage Growth Tracker](https://www.atlantafed.org/chcs/wage-growth-tracker) shows the historically unprecedented acceleration of wage growth in recent months with median wage inflaton (using the weighted 3-month moving average of median wages) in July 2022 reaching 7.0 percent.

"The idea that inflation can fall dramatically without a corresponding rise in labor market slack runs counter to standard economic theory, and is inconsistent with the historical evidence," says [Domash and Summers (2022)b](https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w29910/w29910.pdf)[^6]. The results from Domash and Summers (2022a) suggest that a given level of unemployment today is likely associated with a significantly more inflationary rate of wage growth than in the past.

[^1]: Anna Stansbury and Lawrence H. Summers, "Productivity and Pay: Is the Link Broken?" *PIIE Working Paper* 18-5, June 2018.

[^2]: Anna Stansbury and Lawrence H. Summers, "The Declining Worker Power Hypothesis: An Explanation for the Recent Evolution of the American Economy," *Brookings Papers on Economic Activity*, Spring 2020.

[^3]: David G. Blanchflower and Andrew T. Levin, "Labor Market Slack and Monetary Policy," *NBER Working Paper* 21094, April 2015.

[^4]: Alex Domash and Lawrence H. Summers, "How Tight Are U.S. Labor Markets?" *NBER Working Paper* 29739, February 2022.

[^5]: Pascal Michaillat and Emmanuel Saez, "Optimal Public Expenditure with Inefficient Unemployment," *Review of Economics Studies* (2019) **86**, 1301-1331.

[^6]: Alex Domash and Lawrence H. Summers, "A Labor Market View on the Risks of a U.S. Hard Landing," *NBER Working Paper* 29910, April 2022.