---
layout: 		post
title: 			"Binary Search Tree in Standard ML"
category:		"Programming Languages"
tags:			data-structures functional-programming
permalink:		/bst-sml/
---

In this post, I would like to describe a Standard ML implementation of **binary search tree (BST)**{: style="color: red"}. Each tree **node**, if not empty, records information about its own **value** along with its **descendant(s)**. A client should be able to (a) <code>find</code> a node value using a **key**; (b) <code>insert</code> values onto an existed tree; (c) <code>remove</code> nodes from an existed tree; (d) perform tree traversal using higher order functions. The BST is kept as general as possible such that the values and keys can be any types.

<!-- excerpt-end -->

<br />
## Table of Contents
{:.no_toc}
* TOC 
{:toc}
<br />

In Standard ML (or SML for short), <code>datatype</code>s are used to introduce new types with value and/or type constructors. For example, <code>order</code> is a new type for key comparisons declared with three nullary value constructors. A value of type <code>order</code> is either <code>LESS</code>, or <code>EQUAL</code>, or <code>GREATER</code>.

```sml
datatype order = LESS | EQUAL | GREATER
```

A value of type <code>compare_function</code> is a function that accepts a pair of keys and returns the relative order between them. A value of type <code>to_key_function</code> is a function that takes an element (value) and returns the matched key. The declarations shown below are type bindings with parameterized type constructors.

```sml
type 'k compare_function = (('k * 'k) -> order)
type ('e,'k) to_key_function = 'e -> 'k
```

One convenience of <code>datatype</code> in SML is that we can create a new type recursively. Here, a tree node is either empty ("doesn't exist", represented by a <code>Nil</code> value) or composed of an element, a left child, and a right child. A leaf is just a node takes the form of <code>Sub (element, Nil, Nil)</code>. Quite naturally, it follows that a tree can be represented as a tuple combining the root node with a key comparison function and a hash function. If the root node has a <code>Nil</code>, then it is an empty tree.
```sml
datatype 'e node = Nil
	             | Sub of 'e * ('e node) * ('e node)
type ('e,'k) tree = ('e node * 'k compare_function * ('e,'k) to_key_function)

fun create_empty(cmp : 'k compare_function, to_key : ('e,'k) to_key_function) : ('e,'k) tree =
    (Nil, cmp, to_key)
```