---
layout:      journal
title:       "July 26, 2023"
description: ""
tags:        electrification renewable-energy entrepreneurship
permalink:   /journal/2023/07/26
---

Some transcripts are gathered below from Patti Poppe's [interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ab8dJ1MIrrc) with Elon Musk at Pacific Gas & Electric Innovation Summit 2023:

> Patti Poppe: *I'd love to know where you think the grid is going and where, you know, obviously you've made some really big predictions about the three times increase in energy demand as a result of electrification, what do you think the role of the grid is in that future?*
>
> Elon Musk: *Yeah, I mean, to be precise, if one looks at total energy consumption globally, in very rough terms, only about a third of it is electricity. You know, and then a third of it is burnt for transport with hydrocarbons, you know, aircraft, boats, cars, and stuff. And then, a third of it is for heating. So, even if you assume that electricity demand is static, in order to transition to a sustainable energy future where everything is electric and sustainably electric, we need a tripling of electrical output. So, you can mark my words here, electrical output will triple. Now, because of the way that the grid has been constructed to match peak demand, there is actually excess capacity if you run the plants sort of 24 hours a day. It might be as much as 2X gain, but it's at least 50 to 100 percent increase in total energy output if power plants are run 24-7 versus just matching the consumer demand. And obviously the reason for that is that hasn't been really, in most cases, a way to buffer energy. What stationary battery packs like the Tesla Megapack enable is to buffer the energy. So, you can essentially run the power plant at its max power output, fill up the battery pack, and then use it as needed. This effectively gives a far greater output potential for the existing electricity generation infrastructure.*
>
> Patti Poppe: *What do you think the full extent of distributed storage and particularly with the idea of bi-directional charging vehicles, Elon, what's your thought on that?*
>
> Elon Musk: *I think there's buffering that is needed obviously at the power plant level, or sort of heavy industry utility level, which is the Megapack. And then there's also energy buffering that is useful at the endpoint, at the consumers' home or the individual business. If I leave one message, it's that the magnitude of the energy problem that lies ahead is absolutely enormous. It's been used for the utility industry. It's great news. People are going to use a lot of electricity, like "a-lot" a lot. In order to satisfy the electricity need of a fully electric transport economy and electric heating, you've got to triple output. And that's just in America. I mean, in places that are industrializing like India, I think it probably is a 10X output. In fact, a friend of mine was talking to me about some of these sort of fundamental ratios or metrics that are interesting to think about. One of them is total amount of energy per person. And you can include thermal energy and electrical energy. And how that has scaled over time is incredible. Before the steam engine, you basically just had . . . energy per person would be like what can you burn with like firewood, or a horse, or an ox. So, this is obviously not much. Now, the total human civilization created energy is gigantic compared to the past. That number of a person is gonna increase, I think, dramatically over time. This friend of mine that I referred to thinks that we may end up at some point, well, if the trend continues, it might end up being like a terawatt per person. A big asterisk around "if the trend continues". Energy per person over time, it looks like a wall at the industrial revolution.*