---
layout:      journal
title:       "August 9, 2023"
description: "Yield Curve Control by Bank of Japan"
tags:        world-economy central-bank
permalink:   /journal/2023/08/09
---

背景：7月28日，日本央行宣布实施更为灵活的YCC措施，即原YCC框架中，10年期国债利率上限的0.5%将不再是硬约束。日本央行确保10年期日本国债利率不超过1%。

A Twitter [thread](https://twitter.com/countdraghula/status/1689092931947487233) by [Peter Farac](https://au.linkedin.com/in/peter-farac-31047857):

> The BoJ has run the most successful policy out of any central bank, hands down. Unlike every other central bank, it chose a disinflationary period to adjust policy, while trading it to avoid high rates volatility.
>
> Since YCC started in September 2016, the BoJ has been 100% successful in keeping Japan government bonds around target. Even now, with an opening to 1%, they have achieved the same. BoJ firepower is credible because the balance sheet hasn't increased at a faster rate during YCC. Strong policy with a credible backstop means that the backstop doesn't necessarily need to be used. Post-2015 slowdown in balance sheet growth is solely due to a smaller fiscal deficit which is now back to equaling nominal growth. Fitch expects a 5% fiscal deficit this year, and with inflation running at above 3.5% we should see this balance to nominal growth. This means government debt is back to being static as percentage of GDP (however taxes have gone up over YCC).
>
> This aim has always been to generate inflation to avoid the deflationary trap. Given Japan's reliance on energy imports, the inflation outcome against the rest of the world has been excellent. Long-term contracts plus small pandemic stimulus has worked.
>
> Rising energy prices disrupted the only thing that can properly derail Japan &mdash; a current account deficit. This policy works for Japan as it is not reliant on outside capital. Debt and the size of the central bank's balance sheet doesn't matter, making YCC the right policy. It's back on track possibly because of how well the currency has traded. ~40% devaluation against the USD and EUR has bumped export competitiveness but they've also achieved a 25% devaluation against the CNY. China benefited Japan massively in the 2000s, as they imported machined parts. But China has caught up, especially in cars (a trend since 2019). Japan has been a "no" on EVs and the Chinese has filled this gap.
>
> Japan struggles with demographics, a theme everyone knows. Given the situation though, YCC has at least not hurt, and has probably helped. The adjustment to 1% cap has been done at a time when it was unlikely to panic the market and force bigger BoJ's buys than necessary, unlike nearly every other central banks who decided to do the same stupid thing in September 2022 and panic on inflation, driving huge rates volatility and reverberating that through the economy. The BoJ waited, moved at the right time, and then followed up with purchases to stop volatility.
>
> The BoJ realizes that volatility is worse for an economy than level. By promoting low volatility they've given Japan the best chance despite its difficult situation. Keep that current account positive and Japan won't wobble for a while. The net international investment position (NIIP) means savings will work temporarily.
>
> This policy isn't right for every country. Japan's unique situation makes a freely floating foreign exchange better than freely floating bond prices. Others have to control foreign exchange, like China. For the U.S., neither make sense. Forget about the BoJ's balance sheet. We've passed that point.